sing, goddess, the wrath of achilles peleus' son, the ruinous wrath that
brought on the achaians woes innumerable, and hurled down into hades
many strong souls of heroes, and gave their bodies to be a prey to dogs
and all winged fowls; and so the counsel of zeus wrought out its
accomplishment from the day when first strife parted atreides king of
men and noble achilles.

who among the gods set the twain at strife and variance? apollo, the son
of leto and of zeus; for he in anger at the king sent a sore plague upon
the host, so that the folk began to perish, because atreides had done
dishonour to chryses the priest. for the priest had come to the
achaians' fleet ships to win his daughter's freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling; and bare in his hands the fillet of apollo the
far-darter upon a golden staff; and made his prayer unto all the
achaians, and most of all to the two sons of atreus, orderers of the
host; "ye sons of atreus and all ye well-greaved achaians, now may the
gods that dwell in the mansions of olympus grant you to lay waste the
city of priam, and to fare happily homeward; only set ye my dear child
free, and accept the ransom in reverence to the son of zeus, far-darting
apollo."

then all the other achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest and
accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
agamemnon son of atreus, but he roughly sent him away, and laid stern
charge upon him, saying: "let me not find thee, old man, amid the hollow
ships, whether tarrying now or returning again hereafter, lest the staff
and fillet of the god avail thee naught. and her will i not set free;
nay, ere that shall old age come on her in our house, in argos, far from
her native land, where she shall ply the loom and serve my couch. but
depart, provoke me not, that thou mayest the rather go in peace."

so said he, and the old man was afraid and obeyed his word, and fared
silently along the shore of the loud-sounding sea. then went that aged
man apart and prayed aloud to king apollo, whom leto of the fair locks
bare: "hear me, god of the silver bow, that standest over chryse and
holy killa, and rulest tenedos with might, o smintheus! if ever i built
a temple gracious in thine eyes, or if ever i burnt to thee fat flesh of
thighs of bulls or goats, fulfil thou this my desire; let the danaans
pay by thine arrows for my tears."

so spake he in prayer, and phoebus apollo heard him, and came down from
the peaks of olympus wroth at heart, bearing on his shoulders his bow
and covered quiver. and the arrows clanged upon his shoulders in wrath,
as the god moved; and he descended like to night. then he sate him aloof
from the ships, and let an arrow fly; and there was heard a dread
clanging of the silver bow. first did the assail the mules and fleet
dogs, but afterward, aiming at the men his piercing dart, he smote; and
the pyres of the dead burnt continually in multitude.

now for nine days ranged the god's shafts through the host; but on the
tenth achilles summoned the folk to assembly, for in his mind did
goddess hera of white arms put the thought, because she had pity on the
danaans when she beheld them perishing. now when they had gathered and
were met in assembly, then achilles fleet of foot stood up and spake
among them: "son of atreus, now deem i that we shall return wandering
home again--if verily we might escape death--if war at once and
pestilence must indeed ravage the achaians. but come, let us now inquire
of some soothsayer or priest, yea, or an interpreter of dreams--seeing
that a dream too is of zeus--who shall say wherefore phoebus apollo is
so wroth, whether he blame us by reason of vow or hecatomb; if perchance
he would accept the savour of lambs or unblemished goats, and so would
take away the pestilence from us."

so spake he and sate him down; and there stood up before them kalchas
son of thestor, most excellent far of augurs, who knew both things that
were and that should be and that had been before, and guided the ships
of the achaians to ilios by his soothsaying that phoebus apollo bestowed
on him. he of good intent made harangue and spake amid them: "achilles,
dear to zeus, thou biddest me tell the wrath of apollo, the king that
smiteth afar. therefore will i speak; but do thou make covenant with me,
and swear that verily with all thy heart thou wilt aid me both by word
and deed. for of a truth i deem that i shall provoke one that ruleth all
the argives with might, and whom the achaians obey. for a king is more
of might when he is wroth with a meaner man; even though for the one day
he swallow his anger, yet doth he still keep his displeasure thereafter
in his breast till he accomplish it. consider thou, then, if thou wilt
hold me safe."